---
title: Shakespeare in Virtual Reality
subtitle: Bringing virtual reality into the classroom
layout: page
feature-img: /assets/img/shx_banner.jpg
---

The Shakespeare-VR project uses virtual reality technologies to bring students face-to-face with professional actors performing Shakespearean soliloquies in a replica of Shakespeare’s Blackfriars Playhouse. Directed by Shakespeare scholar and Digital Humanities specialist, Prof. Stephen Wittek, the project combines the talents of partners from the virtual reality production company Stitchbridge, the Eberly Center for Teaching Excellence and Educational Innovation, the CMU Center for Digital Sciences, Humanities, Arts, Research, and Publishing (DSHARP), and the American Shakespeare Center.

In addition to providing an exciting, immersive introduction to the spaces Shakespeare had in mind when he composed his plays, the project makes an important contribution to the growing body of research on virtual reality in humanities education. Shooting at the Blackfriars Playhouse in Staunton, Virginia took place in November, 2018. The first public demonstrations will take place at the digital showcase for the 2019 meeting of the Shakespeare Association of America, with trial tests in classrooms to begin in Spring 2019. The full project, including the virtual reality production, a classroom curriculum, and an archive of development materials will be freely available online by Fall 2019.

Virtual reality offers instructors a powerful new vehicle for demonstrating crucial details of early modern theatrical space: the thrust stage, the upper stage, the trap door, the tiring room, the discovery space, the tiered seating, the yard, and various other physical attributes. Attention to these details is important because, in order to understand the structure and conventions of a dramatic text, one must first understand that dramatists wrote with the capabilities and constraints of an extremely specific environment in mind.

An ideal introduction to the spatial particularities of Shakespearean drama would therefore involve attendance at a performance in a Shakespearean theater—an option that is obviously unavailable at most universities. To establish a general semblance of theatrical space, instructors regularly employ two-dimensional visual aids, such as PowerPoint slides and video clips of live performances at the Globe or the American Shakespeare Center. Although these efforts help to clarify some basic distinctions between drama and other forms of literature, they can ultimately only offer a very abstract representation of what theatrical space actually looked and felt like, and are therefore a fundamentally limited vehicle for bridging the gap between a dramatic text and the physical dynamics of theatrical experience.
